IMO eths networking can be broken up into three parts - p2p transport, application network protocols, and network management (includes dsicv5).
p2p transport stuff bridges the gap between tcp/quic and network app protocls like req/resp | gossipsub. a way to think about libp2p at a high level is libp2p gives me a secure connection with another peer where i can have a n number of logical "streams" where each can handle communication for a specific network app protocol thay may or may not need state. For any given app protocl you just register handlers that handle incomming messages for streams that belong to that protocol anbd follow some set of rules. VERY SIMPLE! now whats slighty confusin is the difference between req resp and gossip sub. So gossip sub is a pre made non etheruem specific protocol whose protocol id is "/meshsub/1.1.0" that hash state and manages topics within that state. So basicaly etheruem is building on top of that exisitng netowrk applcaition protocol. As fpr req resp, etheruem is actually deffing custom netowrk app protocls that change for each fork given the protocol name has the digest in it. Luickly the handles for these protocl have no messaeging speciif state and they follow a simple client server setup of jsut serving the beacon state! EASY! But to highlight when forks happen you are legit going to regester support for all new netowrk app protocols for all of etyhs req resps. Think this is why you were talking about having grace perioud for the old protocls after a fork. What also cool is that libp2p has some opther premade netowrk app protocls such as /ipfs/id/1.0.0 which you can use to get basic info such as the nodes supported protocol
ok now for the guts of libp2p:
to setup a p2p connection to support n streams - i first do handshake messages to verify I'm talking to a peer who at least will respond to my messages. then my next task would be to set up a secure encrypted channel via XX Noise to ensure no MIM attack or eavesdropping. This is basically done with a two key setup where you have a static key (which our light client will have to create per CLI run or support persistent keys) and a temp key that is used per connection to another peer (this one should be hidden behind libp2p). The two-key setup gives a situation where if you lose your static key only your future messages are at risk, and if your temp key is lost only the current session is at risk. There is also this cool crypto primitive here I never learned about called DH, where you can set up a shared secret between the two peers to encrypt the messages without ever having to send the secret over the network. Anyway, at the end of this process the two peers will be able to send encrypted data between each other.
then after the XX Noise we enter the multiplexing phase of the interaction between the two peers. The purpose of multiplexing is that after i set up an encrypted channel with a peer, i don't want to have to repeat this process over again on different ports with the same peer if i want to communicate with different protocols with that peer — this is even essential for light clients because while we are requesting info we still need to be processing incoming messages for the gossipsub protocol, so we need a way to participate in multiple network app protocols over a single encrypted channel/port with a peer. this is done mostly by first confirming with the peer they are following the same multiplexing protocol, then a "stream" is set up for a specific network app protocol that the peer wants to use. every stream belongs to a specific protocol and each message sent on that stream "should" be sent to the handler the other peer has for that protocol. so on beacon node when we register we are basicaly adding handles for the req resp messages where the protocol name has the fork digest in it. So after every hard frok, techincally all of the req resp procotols change to a new version even if functioanilty does not change. Now this is sperate from the gopssip stuff because topics are handled within the "/meshsub/x.x.x" protocol.
above was basicaly the description of p2p transport and network app protocols, now we need to talk about the netowrk management. So to me the network manager will include peer discover via discv5, message validation, chaching, and peer socring, events, and metrics - there might be more stuff but i think that is meat of it. Message validation is tricky to me becasue when we talk about validtation for req resp you would think that is actualy part of the req resp network app protocols but for gossip sub since we are buildin on top its maybe outside of the libp2p protocl. the distinction doesnt matetr but my brain fights me. Anyway this network manager part is really what ties everything together. as for discv5, my gut tells me dont dig more into this and just accept it as a udp based peer discover search engine that manages a routing table of know peers and their enrs. This will be different from a connected peer list that will be maintained by the network manager. Now there is ton more to talk about here but good for intial first pass.

one misconception i am realizing i have is that gossipsub is not just a regular network application protocol with some state. gossipsub is a network app protocol within a wider protocol to manage what happens across streams. you tell gossipsub what topics you are interested in. it then takes peers and opens up n gossipsub streams and sends them subscribe messages to let them know what topics you want to participate in. then from these channels and others that peers opened with you - you also get subscribe messages. as messages come in for each topic, you build a list of gossip peers for that topic (these are a subset of the total peers you have gossipsub streams open with). then you will build a mesh for a topic using the gossip peers for a given topic. basically, mesh peers agree that you will send each other the full topic messages (large) when they are received via a publish from another peer. as a topic's mesh peers send you topic messages via published messages, you will also send to other peers in the mesh, and also send very lightweight ihave messages with the hash of the message to your gossip peers not in the mesh. then at some heartbeat, the mesh will be maintained for each topic, which will be a function of peer scores. in addition, during the heartbeat process, we will always check if a topic's gossip peer not part of the mesh has sent us an ihave message for a message that we have not received yet - if they did, we then request the full message with iwant. this two pronged approach having a lightweight topic gossip peer set and a heavy topic mesh set balances decentralization and data availability by not overloading the network with too many large messages but ensuring we have a backup plan of iwant to ensure we don't miss out on data.

also im realizing subnets are more of a protocol thing. basically, if you have a topic with one publisher per slot, gossip sub scales really nicely where the whole network can easily get the message in several hops. but in the case of attestations - you have a ton of people publishing at once. The solution is simple - have 64 different topics, then a RANDAO-style chosen aggregator listens to their assigned subnet topic, collects attestations, and publishes an aggregate to a global topic that will only have about 64 publishers per slot which is fine. this logic applies to both sync committees and attestations. gossipsub solves the scaling issue of one to many in P2P networks but does poorly when trying to scale many to many - eth uses subnet topics and aggregators to solve this